# Cook Book for tidyData.csv

This is the cookbook for the tidyData.txt dataset generated by the *run_analysis.R* code, which transforms the _Human Activity Recognition Usiing Smartphones_ datasets provided by the University of California-Irvine into a tidy dataset that can be used for future analysis. The code performing this transformation is contained within this GitHub repository. 

## Background
### File format
The _tidyData.txt_ file is comma seperated and contains a header with the column names. The file is also available as a CSV file (see _tidyData.csv_). There is no difference between these two files other than the file extention.

### Original dataset
The original dataset, _Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones_, is provided by the University of California - Irvine's Center for Machine Learning and Intelligent Systems. This dataset is described as follows:


```
The [datasets contain the output from] experiments [that] have been carried
out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each
person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS,
SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the 
waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear
acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The 
experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained
dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers
was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying
noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% 
overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has 
gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth 
low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is 
assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz 
cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by 
calculating variables from the time and frequency domain.
```

This dataset contains the following records:
* Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration. 
* Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope. 
* A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables. 
* Its activity label. 
* An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.

For more information, please visit: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones


## How to reproduce the transformations
The _tidyData.txt_ file is produced by the *run_analysis.R* code. To execute this code, run its **runAnalysis** function, which will perform all the other contained functions needed to produce the tidy dataset from the original UCI smartphone dataset. Note that this function both saves the resulting dataset into a comma-seperated file named _tidyData.txt_ and returns the tidy dataset as a dataframe. The following is the recommended way of running the code once the **run_Analysis.R** file has been sourced in R:

`tidyData <- runAnalysis()`

### Transformations performed to produce the tidy dataset
To transform the dataset into the specified tidy dataset, the code performs the following specific actions, each of which is triggered by a dedicated function held within the *run_Analysis.R* code file:

* Step 1: Loads from file and then merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
* Step 2: Identifies only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation measurements. 
* Step 3: Extracts only the measurements identified in Step 2.
* Step 4: Adds descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set.
* Step 5: Creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable -- for each activity and each subject.
* Step 6: Makes the column names more descriptive in line with best practice naming conventions.
* Step 7: Writes the Tidy dataset to file.


# Description of Variables
The tidy dataset contains 68 variables with 180 observations (as well as a column header). Specifically, the dataset contains averages for 66 smartphone sensor measurements collected on 6 distinct activities performed by 30 unique subjects.

## Identifiers

The identifier columns are:

1. **subject** - this column contains an _integer_ that is unique to one of the 30 subjects
2. **activity** - this column contains a _string_ that identifies 1 of the 6 ctivity performed by the subjects:
  1. WALKING
  2. WALKING_UPSTAIRS
  3. WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
  4. SITTING
  5. STANDING
  6. LAYING

## Measurements
The dataset contains 66 seperate measurements for each of the 6 activities performed by each of the 30 subjects. The dataset presents the **AVERAGES** of the mean and standard  deviation variables contained in the original dataset (please see the section above, *Background --> Original dataset*, for introductory information on the type of data collected as well as their source and relevant conditions).

*Note that each measurement was normalized and bounded within [-1,1].*

Each measurement contained in the tidy dataset is described in the column header, using the following descriptors:

* **time** or **frequency** (all variables): each measurement represents either:
  * time domain signals (*time*), which were captured at a constant rate of 50Hz and filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise; or
    * Examples: *timeBodyAccelerometerMean[X,Y,Z]* and *timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStdDev[X,Y,Z]* 
  * the frequency domain signals (*frequency*), which were derived by applying a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to some of the signals. 
    * Examples: *frequencyBodyAccelerometerMean[X,Y,Z]* and *frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMean[X,Y,Z]* 

* **Body** or **Gravity** (all variables): Each measurement represents either the (*Body*) or gravity (*Gravity*)  acceleration signals into which the data has been seperated using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz.
  * Examples:  *timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean* vs. *timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeMean* 

* **Accelerometer** or **Gyroscope** (all variables): Each variable represents sensor signal data collected from either the phone's *Accelerometer*, measuring linear acceleration, or the phone's *Gyroscope*, measuring 3-axial angular velocity.

* **Mean** or **StdDev** (all variables): each variable reports on either the average (*Mean*) or the standard deviation (*StdDev*).
  * Examples: *timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMean* vs. *timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeStdDev*; and *timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean* vs.  and *timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeStdDev*

* **X**, **Y*, **Z** (select variables): Some column labels conclude with either an *X, Y, or Z*, indicating the axis on which the measurement estimates the feature vector for the relevant pattern. 
  * Examples: *frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanX*, *frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanY*, *frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanZ*

* **Jerk** (select variables): Some variables, which include *Jerk* in the column label, represent jerk signals obtained by the sensors derived from the body linear acceleration and angular velocity.
  * Examples: *timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanZ*, timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStdDevX, *timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean* 

* **Magnitude** (select variables): Some variables, which include the term *Magnitude* in the column label, report the magnitude of the three-dimenisional signals obtained, calculated using the Euclidean norm.
  * Examples: *timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeStdDev*, *timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeMean*, and *frequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean*

## Full List of Variables

1. **subject** (integer: 0:30)
2. **activity** (string of 1 of 6 factors: 1. WALKING, 2. WALKING_UPSTAIRS, 3. WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, 4. SITTING, 5. STANDING, 6. LAYING)
3. timeBodyAccelerometerMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
4. timeBodyAccelerometerMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
5. timeBodyAccelerometerMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
6. timeBodyAccelerometerStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
7. timeBodyAccelerometerStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
8. timeBodyAccelerometerStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
9. timeGravityAccelerometerMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
10. timeGravityAccelerometerMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
11. timeGravityAccelerometerMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
12. timeGravityAccelerometerStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
13. timeGravityAccelerometerStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
14. timeGravityAccelerometerStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
15. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
16. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
17. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
18. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
19. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
20. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
21. timeBodyGyroscopeMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
22. timeBodyGyroscopeMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
23. timeBodyGyroscopeMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
24. timeBodyGyroscopeStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
25. timeBodyGyroscopeStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
26. timeBodyGyroscopeStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
27. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
28. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
29. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
30. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
31. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
32. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
33. timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
34. timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
35. timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
36. timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
37. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
38. timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
39. timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
40. timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
41. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
42. timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
43. frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
44. frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
45. frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
46. frequencyBodyAccelerometerStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
47. frequencyBodyAccelerometerStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
48. frequencyBodyAccelerometerStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
49. frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
50. frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
51. frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
52. frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
53. frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
54. frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
55. frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanX (numeric: between [-1,1])
56. frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanY (numeric: between [-1,1])
57. frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
58. frequencyBodyGyroscopeStdDevX (numeric: between [-1,1])
59. frequencyBodyGyroscopeStdDevY (numeric: between [-1,1])
50. frequencyBodyGyroscopeStdDevZ (numeric: between [-1,1])
61. frequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
62. frequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
63. frequencyBodyBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
64. frequencyBodyBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
65. frequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
66. frequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
67. frequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean (numeric: between [-1,1])
68. frequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeStdDev (numeric: between [-1,1])
